# The NumPy Portal Project

### Overview

NumPy is a foundational Python library that provides a multidimensional array object and an extensive set of related objects and routines. The library serves a wide range of users, from students and researchers to industry-based data scientists. In addition, a large number of software packages depend on NumPy.

The NumPy Portal Project will create a user-focused portal into the NumPy software ecosystem, guiding visitors to resources based on their areas of interest. The portal will have a modern, visually appealing design. It will enhance overall site flow by connecting users to existing content via new, efficient pathways. 

This proposal builds on a project idea described by the NumPy organization for GSoD ‘19: “High level restructuring and end user focus.” 

### Rationale

The core NumPy project [1] has more than 700 direct contributors. In addition, NumPy code is highly leveraged; more than 14,000 packages and applications depend on it [2]. Many of these dependencies are small individual projects, but a substantial number are leading-edge efforts with large, active communities. Examples include SciPy (software for math, science, engineering, and data science), scikit-learn (machine learning), Matplotlib (2D plotting), pandas (labeled data structures and analysis tools), spaCy (natural language processing), and Bokeh (interactive visualization). These packages have other packages and applications dependent on them. Diagrams presented by Christian Staudt at PyData Warsaw 2017 [3] convey a sense of the complexity of the ecosystem. Metrics from sites directing readers into numpy.org and scipy.org convey the level of activity and interest in the two sites [4].

A subset of these projects can be viewed as a NumPy ecosystem. Within that ecosystem, developers tend to use their own subsets of libraries based on analytic interests and goals. A considerable amount of documentation exists for NumPy and associated projects; tailoring site structure and content for specific audiences will make it easier for site visitors to accomplish their goals. 

From an organizational perspective, enhanced site navigability could attract more contributors, make it easier for funding sources to find information, and decrease the organization’s need to respond to questions and issues (when those questions can be addressed by existing documentation). 

The new portal could also benefit society as a whole. Easier access to the NumPy ecosystem could accelerate the emergence and adoption of new analytic approaches.

(Note: Numbers in square brackets refer to links at the end of this document.)

### Current Site Content and Structure

The numpy.org homepage [5] contains a description of NumPy, a “Getting Started” section, links to current and past documentation, information about ways to support NumPy, and a list of institutional partners. A sidebar contains links to community information, the NumPy license, the code of conduct, and historical information.

NumPy documentation is organized by software version. Documentation includes a User Guide with setup information, a QuickStart tutorial, NumPy basics, information about NumPy for MATLAB users, information about interfaces to languages such as C and Fortran, and instructions for building documentation; and an extensive NumPy Reference manual with detailed information about NumPy objects, functions, and modules. The site also hosts benchmarking information, a guide for contributing to NumPy, instructions for building documentation, a table of contents and index, a search page, and a glossary of terms. 

A large portion of the NumPy site is dedicated to NumPy reference documentation. The site also hosts a robust list of enhancement proposals. 

The NumPy website is generated by the Sphinx Python documentation generator. Reference material is included via docstrings embedded in NumPy source code. A mind map [6] shows two exploratory paths to NumPy documentation. Both paths start at numfocus.org. 

### Proposed Content and Structure

The new portal will add two layers of web pages to the NumPy ecosystem website:
* A new homepage will focus on essential offerings and resources. We have a starting list of elements [7] from past discussions within the community [8]. 
* Several second-level pages organized by areas of interest, such as visualization; statistics; data science; life sciences; build, test, packaging, and versioning tools; and interoperability. These pages will guide readers to installation instructions, community information, user guides, and so on. 
A very rough site mockup is available on GitHub [9].

The portal will also serve as an extensible framework where ecosystem contributors can add modules. 

In addition to creating a new portal, here are several goals if time permits:
* Fill gaps in existing documentation. 
* Where possible, differentiate between user tasks and actions, conceptual material, and reference information.
* As much as possible, organize content into modular topics that can be stored in a relevant location and reused in various contexts. Reduce duplicate content as much as possible.  
* Orient navigation options toward user context (versus type of information).
* Use terminology consistently.
* Offer a consistent set of local navigation options across pages. 

### Implementation Plan

The portal project will iterate through cycles of research, design, review, implement, and test, followed by launch, performance evaluation, and tuning. Project planning is heavily weighted toward user and ecosystem research. Stakeholder input will be requested at key milestones throughout the project, and status updates will be posted weekly or as requested by mentors. 

This plan is much more detailed at the start of the project than toward the end; it will need to be revised after research and discussions with stakeholders. The timeline assumes that the portal will be implemented as a long-running GSoD project, with a one-month community bonding period followed by six months of development, testing, and evaluation. 

#### Community Bonding phase, August 1, 2019 to September 1, 2019

##### Initial Collaboration and Research

Goals for this phase are as follows:
* Get to know the community and potential collaborators. 
  1. Create a document to help identify stakeholders. Include space for name, contact info, and areas of interest and expertise.
  2.  Post the document for input.
  3.  Find out which potential stakeholders are interested in being involved in the project, and which stages or focus areas are most interesting to them.
  4. Get to know web developers and other writers whose work relates to this project. Understand roles and develop ways to collaborate.  
* Deepen the understanding of audiences: who they are, and how they use existing site content. Understand users’ contextual framework. Develop personas, user scenarios, and use cases. 
* Identify which projects will be included in the initial launch of the portal.
* Finish inventorying, mapping, and documenting existing site content. If time permits, identify content that could be written or curated to fill gaps. 

We have a starting list of audiences and projects [7] from past discussions within the community [8]. Additional discussions with stakeholders will firm up the scope, content, and design. It will be important to develop and maintain stakeholder alignment throughout the project. 


#### Documentation Development phase, September 2, 2019 to February 28, 2020


##### Weeks 1 through 6: Initial Collaboration and Research (continued)

* Identify which tasks can be done in parallel with web development and during review cycles. 
* Create processes and structures for stakeholder input, such as editable Google docs, a GitHub repo, or discussion threads. 
* Complete research tasks that were started during the community bonding phase. 

Milestones: By October 13th, have a clear description of user audiences, a list of software projects to include in the portal, and a list of interest areas for second-level portal pages. (Assumption: the site will change over time as the ecosystem evolves.) Revise the schedule; post the revised plan and timeline for review.


##### Weeks 7 through 12: Design the Portal and Identify Relevant Content 

This phase of the project involves organizing existing material in new ways:
* Develop a user-task matrix.
* Sort existing content and create an inventory of content grouped by interest area.
* Map user tasks to relevant content. Select the most relevant, high-quality information for each audience. 

During this time, web development could proceed in parallel:
* The general structure of portal pages.
* UI elements such as the menu, local navigation, breadcrumbs, filters, and so on. 
* The framework UI that surrounds the content and helps the user perform actions and navigate through the site. It includes navigation and components like sidebars and bottom bars. 
* Plans for different devices and screen sizes. 

Milestones: By November 24th, post the portal design and the draft user-task flow for review. 

Week 13: Holiday gap  

##### Weeks 14 through 20: Implement, Test, and Launch the Portal 

Implement and test the portal:
* Add portal content.
* Connect the portal to existing documentation and other content. 
* Test links. 
* Check flow for identified audiences.
* Have a soft launch for stakeholder testing and review. 


Weeks 16 and 17: Holiday gap

Milestone: By January 19th, have stakeholder agreement that the portal is ready to launch.


##### Weeks 21 through 23: Evaluate and Tune

Collect metrics for the new portal and use these metrics to tune access paths. 

February 9th: successful project completion!

### Deliverables

The following deliverables are required for successful completion of the project:
* A fully functioning portal site with the following elements:
  * Homepage
  * Second-level pages for specific areas of interest  
  * Efficient connections from second-level pages to existing site resources, guiding identified audiences to relevant material
* A contribution guide for documentation, extending contributor guidelines on the NumPy site [10]
* A list of items to address in the future, including the following:
  * Gaps discovered in existing content
  * Redundant content
  * Slightly different redundant pages

If time permits, add one or more of the following deliverables in accordance with stakeholder priorities:
* Fill gaps in existing content.
* Refactor existing content to focus on the needs of specific audiences. 
* Begin to reduce duplicate content. Locate each topic in one location based on user access paths. Reuse topics by reference or views. This will help reduce maintenance and out-of-sync documentation.
* Begin to integrate existing site content with the “growing body of on-line literature on scientific computing, data science, resources for learning Python, NumPy, and performance considerations when writing code” [11]. This would also involve creating a process for vetting external content. 
* Add helpful, relevant graphics. 

### Project Risks, Dependencies, and Other Considerations

Risks include the following: 
* The plan might change substantially after input from stakeholders and the community.
* Role definitions might change depending on availability of web developers and other collaborators.

The following dependencies are important for a successful project: 
* Engagement, coordination, and alignment of stakeholders on the scope and design of the portal.
* Stakeholder input during iterative review cycles.
* Assistance with web development.

Here are three other considerations:
* Sensitivity toward how we reference other projects within and beyond the defined ecosystem. There are many open source project offerings in this general space, and they are evolving quickly. 
* Future internationalization of the portal.
* Support for a range of device types.

### Platform and Tools 

Community discussions have identified the following requirements for the portal framework: 
* The portal will use an open source static site generator that supports the following features:
  * A modern, clean look
  * Easy to deploy
* Alternatives include Jekyll, Hugo, and Hyde [8].

This proposal assumes that several open source tools will be used, including GitHub, git, and open static site-generating tools such as Sphinx and Jekyll, Hugo, or Hyde.

### Acknowledgments and References

Thank you to Google and the NumPy community for your interest in great open source documentation.

Thank you to Ralf Gommers, a NumPy mentor and long-time contributor to SciPy and NumPy and other statistical/mathematical libraries, who helped refine the focus, scope, and priorities in this proposal. 


### Resource Links

1) Core NumPy project repository, https://github.com/numpy/numpy
2) GitHub dependency graph, https://github.com/numpy/numpy/network/dependents?dependent_type=PACKAGE&dependents_after=NjE2NzQzNDg4MQ
3) NumPy project dependencies and lifecycle diagram, https://github.com/lgeorge/gsod/blob/master/project-dependencies-and-workflow.pdf,
4) Incoming site metrics, https://github.com/lgeorge/gsod/blob/master/numpy-scipy-inbound-metrics.pdf
5) NumPy homepage, https://www.numpy.org/
6) Exploratory paths to NumPy documentation, https://github.com/lgeorge/gsod/blob/master/NumFOCUS-lg.png
7) Draft lists of site elements, audiences, and interest areas, https://github.com/lgeorge/gsod/blob/master/draft-site-content-lists.pdf
8) Previous homepage discussions: 
  “New Landing Site for Scientific Python,” https://github.com/scientific-python/scientific-python.org/issues/1
  “Design brief for numpy.org,” https://hackmd.io/WrzMdOq9RbKY44Z7UQgp8Q
9) Mockup of sample homepage and second-level page, https://github.com/lgeorge/gsod/blob/master/site-mockup-v2.pdf
10) NumPy contribution guide, https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/dev/index.html
11) NumPy project ideas, https://github.com/numfocus/gsod/blob/master/2019/NumPy_ideas_list.md
